# SIN Documentation

## SIN Runtime Environment

The SIN Runtime Environment (SRE) is a small library that is required by every SIN program. The purpose of the library is to enable certain features of the language that may be invoked when performing operations such as string assignments, array copying, or managing dynamically-allocated memory. In other words, it provides certain runtime functionality for the program required to implement all of its features. Note that this is different from the SIN Standard Library; unlike the SL, the SRE is required for all SIN programs to run, while the SL just provides useful tools to the programmer without being strictly required for execution. Further, the SRE not only contains subroutines, but reserves certain memory buffers for SIN programs that are required for the language to be fully functional. If the SRE is ommitted from the project, build will fail at link time because the compiler assumes the SRE subroutines and data will be available.

A copy of the SIN runtime must be included with a SIN compiler for it to be considered complete, though a user could opt to write their own if they so desired. Further, while these subroutines are *not* intenteded to be used in SIN, a programmer could declare them in the program in order to use them that way, though that would be incredibly inconvenient.

Some functions within the SRE provide runtime error handling. While SIN, like C, does not contain support for runtime exceptions, it has limited runtime error support. One of the crucial areas where this runtime error support is used is in bounds-checking on arrays at runtime. Unlike arrays in C or C++, the `array` type in SIN contains its width alongside the data contained within it, allowing the program to check that all array accession is done within the array's bounds; this is to make the language a little bit safer and easier to use, as allowing the programmer to access the array's length at runtime saves the headache of, for example, passing array length as a parameter when using them in conjunction with functions. Because a runtime array access might be illegal, the language requires that there be a routine available at runtime that will catch the error and alert the user.

This document is to serve as a reference for the built-in runtime environment. Note that much of the SRE's functionality utilizes functions from the C standard library (such as `malloc` and `free`), which is why the SIN compiler requires a working copy of your C compiler of choice to create executables. A compiled copy of the SRE is not included in this project, but a copy of its source can be found [here](https://github.com/rlannon/SRE).

## The Memory Allocation Management System (MAM)

Perhaps the most important piece of the SRE is the Memory Allocation Manager (MAM). In SIN, memory management is typically done with the `alloc` keyword (and possibly `free`, although use of `free` is inadvisable) in combination with location specifiers like `dynamic`. Unlike C, all memory allocation is done with *keywords* instead of library functions. However, this means that some library support is still required, even though it is not visible to the programmer. Rather, it is done automatically by SIN's memory management system, called the Memory Allocation Manager, or MAM.

The MAM implements a garbage collector for the language by using reference counting on all dynamically-allocated resources. Every time a new reference or pointer references a dynamic object, the MAM increments its reference count; every time that pointer is reassigned, or the variable goes out of scope, the reference count is decremented. Once a resource's reference count hits zero, it becomes inaccessible, and the MAM automatically deletes it.

For more information on the MAM, see [this document](Memory%20Allocation%20Manager.md).
